5, 6, 7 MAY 1694                                                   MEMORANDA BY GREGORY


           446       M EM O RANDA BY DAVID GREGORY
                                          5, 6, 7 M AY 1694
                   From the original") in the Library of the Royal Society of London

    44. Adnotata Phys: Math: et Theol: ex Neutono. 5. 6. 7. Maij 1694/2)
                         44 Cantabrigiae 5. 6. 7. Maij 1694.
    Continuo opus esse miraculo ne Sol et lixae per gravitatem coeant. Magnam
in Cometis excentricitatem et ad diversas et contrarias partes cum planetis
divinam denotare manum, ac Cometas ad alium (a planetis) usum destinatos
arguunt. Possunt satellites Jovis et Saturni in locum succedere $, $,
destructorum, et ad novam Creationem reservari. Mars multo minor quam
vulgo ponitur, id evincitur ex inde quod, in situ Achronychio multo minus
 lucidus quam 2j. non obstante majore distantia tum a Sole illustrante tum a $
 vidente. Observationes Flamstedij cum T ychonis^) et Longomontani*^
 observationibus comparatae ostendunt mutuam attractionem 2 ). et *jq, in
 conjunctione proxime preterita 1683.
     Si Corpus quodvis in orbita PQ revolvat viribus ad <S tendentibus, vis qua
  tendit ad -S' est ad vim qua tendit ad P eodem tempore periodico ut -SP x PP^
  ad PPs posita -S*Pparallela ad tangentem 2LPP. demonstratur non ita difficile.^*
  Examinetur hoc theorema transferendo vim a Centro ellipsis ad locum, ab uno
  loco ad alium, a Centro circuli ad punctum infinite distans.




    Si Ordinatae ^4P proportionaliter augeantur ubiquae hantque /t/? ex data vi
  ad -S'in orbita EPD, dabitur vis ad idem -Sin orbita PPD, etiam dato quocunque
  angulo applicationis FL4/? diverso ab PS4P. Hinc a[b] Equabili vi ad circuli
  Centrum transibitur ad vim ad Ellipseos Centrum, hic est lacillimus modus
  pro Motu planetarum in Sectionibus Conicis.^) Talem tractatum habet
  Newtonus/7*
                                                    334
MEMORANDA BY GREGORY                                              5, 6, 7 MAY 1694

    In curvis considerandae omnes conjugatae (quae pro una eademque habendae)
Gycloidis Conjugatae infinite sunt, primariae in hunc modum
protractae in hunc modum                 , con­
tractae in hunc 'H n m r. Nulla enim est                         c
suppositio quae rotam describentem sistat.
Quadratricis item infinitae sunt conjugatae.
Nam punctum Q est intersectio rectae
progredientis ab et rectae AD progredientis                       c         /
 a -B cum velocitatibus ut AC et arcus quad­        <7            3      /
 rantalis DC. Nec ulla est suppositio quae
 sistat hunc motum cum et D ad primum
 Cpervenerint et continuato motu in infinitum                       /t \
 producuntur infinitae conjugatae. Quod si               ) *" / * \
 Catenariae productio per motum esset nota,
 infinitae conjugatae innotescerent. Hinc                  D^_
 harum Curvarum ad aequationes constru­                         Fig. 3
 endas vires.
     Virtus (S) magnetica per flammam interrumpitur, per Calorem inter­
  rumpitur ; virga ferrea, vel diuturno situ perpendiculari, vel frigescendo in situ
  erecto, virtutem Magneticam acquivit a Terra. Sed etiam Mallei ictu forti ad
  alterum extremum magneticam Virtutem concipit: si fortiter feriatur ad
  alterum extremum, poli virgae ferreae permutantur: si fortiter in medio
  percutiatur (puta Malleo ad incudem) magnetismum prorsus amittit. Unde
  Mechanice produci videtur haec virtus.
     Sulci in limatura ferro Magneti circumposita, non fiunt ab effluviis sed quod
  ipsa ramenta limaturae, magnetice excitata, se secundum longitudinem et per
  polos disponant.
     Ang Reflectionis est plerumque non semper, aequalis angulo incidendae,
   prima de Coloribus experimenta instituit et primo theoriam Condidit dum
   Senior Sophista vel Baccalaureus artium esset, professor Lucasianus est factus
   dum Magister in Artibus esset per duos Annos.
                            Cantabrigiae 5 6 7 Maij. 1694
   Duo aut 3 habet folia quibus proprietates coni sectionum (quatenus sint
   Orbitae planetorum vel Cometarum) facillime ex facilibus prop: Generalibus
   deducuntur.
      Congruentiam Hujus philosophiae cum veterum precipue Thaletis philo­
   sophia fuse est ostensurus.^") Epicuri et Lucretij philosophia est vera et
    antiqua, perperam ab illis ad Atheismum detorta. Problema de semita
    projecti dum resistentia est in duplicata velocitatis ratione Novit. Quae de
                                         335
  5, 6, 7 MAY 1694                                          MEMORANDA BY GREGORY

  luna facturus est die 4 scripsi.T ractatum Conscripsit de Originatione
  gentium. Religio Omni tempore eadem, sed quam a Noha primisque homini­
  bus puram acceperunt, Ethnici inventis propriis dcturparunt; Unde Moses
  reformationem instituit retentis adiaphoris Egyptiacis (yEgypti fuere qui
  omnium maxime religionem superstitione deturparunt et ab illis in reliquas
 gentes fluxit). Christus Mosis Religionem reformavit.
    Ex nominibus planetarum a Thoth (Mercurio Aegyptiaco) [datis] (nomina
 vero indidit predecessorum quos deos credi volebat) patet eum Copernicani
 Systematis Cultorem. Diversi Saturni, Joves &c (quaeque enim Natio suos
 fundatores et reges pro diis colebat) Confusionem pariunt. Sectionem IV et
 V cum Quadraturis Curvarum tractatu (quem vidi) 3 aut 4 foliorum (si ab
 utraque parte scriberetur) simul in uno libello at post principia editurus cst.^
 Tractatus de Quadraturis, istam rem mire et ultra quam credi facile potest
 promovet, per series abrumpentes procedit. Cum simplicissimis Comparat.
 Vidi etiam Three Books of Opticks. si imprimeretur princ Math: adaequaret.
 Catoptrica et Dioptrica, Nostra fere Methodo ast Compendiose et Ele­
 ganter prosequitur. De Coloribus Mira et inaudita profert. Haec editurus est
post Academiam abdicatam intra 5 annos, si dum in Academia, in latinum
versa quam operam aeque ferret. De Coloribus Rerum Naturalium Schedulam
Regiae Societati obtulit. Tractatus hic absolutus est, de quadam Colorum specie
et modo producendi nondum plene satisfactus. Sed prior pars satisfaciet.
Radius lucis paraxysmos reflectendi aut refringendi habent et quidem incertos.
Omnis Colorum varietas in Corporibus naturalibus est a magnitudine parti­
cularum sive attomorum componentium. Nihil coloratum cujus attomi non
sunt pellucidi, Nigrorum attomi sunt Minimi. Tabula in aere aqua et vitro
definitur attomorum horum magnitudo. Bullis Aqueis puerilibus experimenta
facta, in aere distantia inter lentem convexam et planam, in vitro ex
analogia.^
   Ad Religionem non requiritur Status animae separatus sed resurrectio cum
memoria continuata.

   [44]                                                                 5, 6, 7 Afay 1694
Annotations Physical, Mathematical and Theological from Newton. 5, 6, 7 May 1694.
[Newton says] that a continual miracle is needed to prevent the Sun and the fixed stars
from rushing together through gravity: that the great eccentricity in Comets in directions
both different from and contrary to the planets indicates a divine hand: and implies
that the Comets are destined for a use other than that of the planets. The Satellites
ofjupiter and Saturn can take the places of the Earth, Venus, Mars if they are destroyed,
and be held in reserve for a new Creation. Mars is much smaller than is commonly
                                          336
MEMORANDA DY GREGORY                                                      5, 6, 7 MAY 1694

supposed. This is proved from the fact that when it rises in the evening it is much less
brilliant than Jupiter notwithstanding the greater distance both from the Sun that
illumines it and from the Earth that views it. Flamsteed's observations when compared
with those of Tycho and Longomontanus prove the mutual attraction of Jupiter
and Saturn in their most recent past conjunction in 1683.
   If any body revolve in an orbit PQ with forces tending to 6*, the force which tends to 6*
is to the force which tends to P in the same periodic time as PP x PP 3 to       supposing
     to be parallel to the tangent AlPP. The proof is not so difficult.^* Let this theorem
be examined by transferring the force from the centre of the ellipse to a focus, from one
focus to the other, [or] from the centre of a circle to an infinitely distant point.




   If ordinates 2IP be increased proportionally everywhere and become A!/?, from a
given force towards 6*in the orbit PAD will be given a force towards the same 6*in the
orbit P/7D even when the angle of application however given for P/?D differs from that
for PAD."** Hence there will be a transformation from a constant force towards the centre
of a circle to a force towards the centre of an ellipse. This is the easiest way for the
motion of the planets in conic sections. Newton has such a tract.'?*
   Among curves all conjugates are to be con­
sidered (and it is to be reckoned as one and the                      c
same curve): of cycloids there are an infinity of                   3
conjugates, the primary like this               the                                  /?
extended like this                    and the con­
tracted like ,-y-g-g-y-. For there is no limitation                   c          /
imposed upon the wheel that describes the curve.        ?
The conjugates of the quadratrix also are infinite
in number. For the point $ is the intersection of
the right line Ay progressing from yf and the right           / \ <5 y/ \ \
line JD progressing from P with velocities as viC            (" ^1/X/ 1t . 1y?
and as the quadrantal arc PC. And there is not
any other supposition that may be imposed on
this motion when # and 7) have arrived [together]                 Fig.3
at the first C, and by continuing the motion in-
definitely an infinite number of conjugates are produced. But if the generation of a
   22                                                                              T MI
                                          337
6, 6, 7 MAY 1694                                           MEMORANDA BY GREGORY

catenary through motion were known an infinite number of conjugates would be
recognized. Hence the power of these curves for constructing equations.
   Magnetic virtue *"' is destroyed by a dame, and by heat: a rod of iron, either by
standing long in a perpendicular position, or by cooling in an erect position, acquires
magnetic virtue from the Earth. But it gets magnetic virtue too with a strong blow of a
hammer at either extremity. If it is struck hard at one or other end the poles of the iron
rod are interchanged: if it is struck in the middle (say with hammering at an anvil) it
quite loses its magnetism. And so this virtue seems to be produced by mechanical
means.
   Furrows among filings placed around an iron magnet are not made by effluvia but
because the bits of the filings are themselves magnetically excited and arrange them­
selves longitudinally and through the poles.
   The angle of reflexion, though generally, is not always equal to the angle of incidence.
He began his first experiments on colours and first established the theory while he was
Senior Sophist or Bachelor of Arts. He was made Lucasian Professor after being Master
of Arts for two years.<"'
                 !          Cambridge 5, 6, 7 May 1694
  He has two or three sheets in which the properties of conic sections (in so far as they
form the orbits of planets and of comets) are very easily deduced from easy general
propositions.
   He will spread himself in exhibiting the agreement of this philosophy with that of the
Ancients and principally with that of Thales.**"* The philosophy of Epicurus and
Lucretius is true and old, but was wrongly interpreted by the ancients as atheism. He
[Newton] knows the problem of the path of a projectile when the resistance is in the
duplicate ratio of the velocity. What he intends to do about the Moon I wrote down on
the 4th.**** He has composed a tract on the origin of nations. Religion is the same at
all times, but religion which they received pure from Noah and the first men, the
nations debased by their own inventions. Moses began a reformation but retained the
indifferent elements of the Egyptians (it was the Egyptians who most of all debased
religion with superstition and from them it spread to the other peoples). Christ reformed
the religion of Moses.
   It is clear from the names of the planets given by Thoth (the Egyptian Mercury)—
he gave them, in fact, the names of his predecessors whom he wished to be accepted as
gods— that he was a believer in the Copernican system. Various Saturns, Joves etc. (for
each nation worshipped its own founders and kings as gods) beget confusion. He intends
to publish Sections iv and v with the Quadratures of Curves, a tract (which I have seen)
of three or four sheets (if it were written on both sides) together in one small book**s*—
but after publishing the Pnw:)&M.<*"' The tract on Quadratures— he develops that
matter astonishingly and beyond what can readily be believed— proceeds by means of
terminating***' series (series that break off). He compares them with the simplest.
   I also saw ' Three Books of Opticks': if it were printed it would rival the Pn'wz/Ma
                He pursues Catoptrics and Dioptrics almost by my method,**^' concisely
                                          338
MEMORANDA BY GREGORY                                                           S, 6, 7 MAY 1604

and with elegance. He sets forth unheard-of wonders about colours. These he intends
to publish within five years after retiring from the University. If [they are published]
while [he is still] at the University [they will be] translated into Latin, a work which he
would undertake with equanimity. He has offered a small paper on the Colours of
natural objects to the Royal Society. This tract is complete, though not yet to his full
satisfaction about some aspect of colours and about the way to produce them. But the
earlier part will satisfy him. A ray of light has paroxysms of reflexion or refraction, and
indeterminate ones at that. All variety of colours in natural bodies arises from the size
of the component particles or atoms. Nothing is coloured of which atoms are not
transparent: atoms of black things are the smallest. The size of these atoms in air, water
and glass is defined in a table. He has made experiments with children's bubbles, by
the distance between a convex and a plane lens, in air, and analogously, in glass.**"*
   Not a separate existence of the soul, but a resurrection with a continuation of memory
is the requirement of religion.

                                             NO TE S
   (1 ) R.S. Greg. MS. fos. 68, 69 (=U.L.E. Greg C 44).
   (2) The title is taken from Gregory's Index to Folio C (U.L.E.).
   (3) Tycho Brahe (1546-1601).
   (4) Christian Longomontanus (1562-1647), born in Denmark, was mathematician and
astronomer; he collaborated with Tycho Brahe for eight years, giving good service with his
observations and calculations. From 1605 he was Professor of Mathematics at Copenhagen.
   (5) See Memoranda 441,12°, p. 312, The points R and Aare any given points within the orbit.
   (6) This property is proved by Horsley (n, 67).
   (7) No such treatise has been found.
   (8) Newton uses this term 'magnetic virtue' in the
   (9) Newton graduated as Bachelor of Arts in January 1664/5; he became Master of Arts
in March 1667/8; and was appointed Lucasian Professor in the autumn of 1669.
   (10) There is an autograph manuscript by Newton containing nine sheets devoted to this
subject, in the Library of the Royal Society (R.S. Greg. MS. fos. 6-14v). Newton, it would
appear, handed it over to David Gregory either as a gift or a loan, for there is a copy of it, in
Gregory's hand, at the end of his manuscript book 'Notae Principiorum' (the book was
written throughout a period ending in 1697: see note (14), p. 338); and it is printed in part
in the preface to Gregory's             PAyuCff g! GgonMfnae           (1702), although there
is no mention of Newton there.
   The manuscript is cast in a form that suggests that Newton intended it as a commentary
upon Propositions 4-9 of the third book of the Pn'nrzpM. It ends with three paragraphs, the
first and third of which appear to be an early draff of the general Scholium at the end of the
second edition of the          (1713), while the second paragraph formed the substance of a
passage which is found only in the third edition (1726). See the notice of the manuscript by
Dr James Craufurd Gregory (7r<wac%on.f o/* Poyaf -Sowly o/*E&AMfgA, 12 (1834), 64-76).
                                             339                                        22-2
     ? MAY 1694                                                         MEMORANDA DY GREGORY

       (11) See Memoranda 441, sections 18-20.
       (12) Principia, Book i, sections rv and v (see Memoranda 441, section 26, and 461 at
     reference (3), p. 384). The Dr QHaxfrafKra was first published with the       in 1704 as one of
     two appendices, the other being the Enumerabo.
        (13) See Memoranda 461 for particulars of the projected second edition.
        (14) Cf. Letter 374, note (5), p. 179.
        (15) See vol. ii, note (1), p. 397.
         (16) The renewed interest of Wallis and others in Newton's still unpublished optical work
      may well have been the sequel to what Gregory told them of these conversations with Newton.
      The following extract is taken from the Journal Book of the Royal Society, 1694: 'July 4,1694.
      Ordered that a Letter be written to Mr Isaac Newton, praying that he will please to Com­
6P    municate to the Society in order to be Published his Treatise of Light and Colours, and what
      other Mathematicall or Physicali Treatises he has ready by him.' Presumably he would
      derive the size of atoms in water from bubbles and their size in air from Newton's rings.


                   447     M EM ORANDA BY D A V ID GREGORY
                                                   [? M AY 1694]
                         From the original <*' in the Library of the Royal Society of London

                                             45
                                         Problema.
                   Invenire circulum equicurvum cum Sectione Conica
                                    ad datum punctum.
         Ut circulus ^4PG eandem habeat Curvaturam cum Sectione Conica ad
       datum punctum /1, patet primo circuli diametrum eandem esse debere quoad
       positionem cum recta /1G curvae (sive rectae rlT tangenti curvam) ad A
       perpendiculari, et preterea oportere PC ordinatam in circulo equalem^) esse
       PD eadem ordinatae ad Conisectionem productae. Sed
          PC%= GPxP.d = G.dxP.<4—P.4<y=(evanescente P/ly ob AB minimam)
                                                                        G,4xPA
       Rursus PD(7=DP% (evanescente quippe dP evanescit et EP huic in data
        ratione) =J.E x P (P est latus rectum ad diametrum ^1P pertinens) *3'
                                          A ExP
                                        * i d X^E
        hoc est A ExPT PxAE<7                      PxAEy
                             i d (est quippe — i d in ellipsi,
                                                                       , PxAEc .
                                                           34 °
